Acres organized by the Indian Express
group
as many of you are aware our past guests
at Express Adda have been luminaries
such as the Dalai Lama
economisten Union Minister nitin gadkiri
Olympic champion PV Sindhu filmmaker
Karan johar and writer Amitabh Ghosh
this evening I'd like to welcome Dr
Siddharth Mukherjee to the express Adda
as someone who's demystified and
humanized public discourse on medicine
and health with his empathetic writing
Dr Siddharth Mukherjee is familiar to
many as the author of The Pulitzer Prize
winning the Emperor of all maladies a
biography of cancer and the Gene and
intimate history but is also an eminent
oncologist whose recent initiative in
Bangalore immuneal therapeutic Limited
in collaboration with biotric and
entrepreneur Kiran mazumdar show has
been rolling out a significant clinical
trial on the treatment of cancer called
the car T Cell Therapy already in use in
several countries this is aimed at
significantly Bringing Down the cost of
therapy for patients in India
new york-based Dr Mukherjee has also
recently published his third work the
song of the cell and exploration of
medicine and the new human that takes
readers through an exploration of the
fundamental unit of life the cell and
its integral role in medical science
we're hoping for a fascinating exchange
of ideas in an interaction that will
certainly offer a window into Dr
mukherjee's undeniable gift for metaphor
besides of course the complex world of
Cell Biology and a number of medical
Mysteries
Dr Mukherjee will be in conversation
today with ananth koinka executive
director of the express group and
devyani National features editor the
Indian Express their data days presented
by Raj presented by Rajiv Gandhi Cancer
Institute and Research Center
co-presented by fostima and frr
immigration and in association with
devanse our Hospitality partner today
islamydia thank you
I'd like to welcome Dr Mukherjee
Anand and devyani on stage please
very warm welcome ladies and gentlemen
uh you know when Raj Kamal jha our our
chief editor I think he's here today
when he asked me uh if you know that
we've that Dr Mukherjee is going to be
here for another and he asked me if I
would be interested in doing the
conversation my instinct was to say no
um would say no because
a you know I I think he's such a great
speaker that I really felt I wanted to
sit back and listen and not have the you
know pressure of steering a conversation
um but also because the two subjects I
struggled at right through school
biology and chemistry
uh and so the you know the the word cell
in the book itself was intimidating for
me
um
but I'm very glad I resisted uh you know
I I didn't go with my instinct uh
because the book was a pleasure to read
absolute pleasure to read it was so
accessible you know he made really
complicated uh sort of heavy science
very accessible relatable easy to read
either digest I must say I didn't expect
that I finished reading the book before
the other but I did it was really that
that nice and that lovely flowing uh
text
um
the book is the book is not only science
it's got culture it's got history it's
got philosophy it's you know it it it
talks it's got poetry it's got
patient stories personal experiences uh
people friends who have dealt with
cancer hero policy makers Regulators
philosophers like Aristotle so it's got
it all
um it really is a wonderful book I I
couldn't recommend it more so that warm
welcome to the other happy higher
thank you very much this feels a little
bit like a firing squad
[Laughter]
I'm On One indent I might be shot by the
by the two of you but anyway yes I'm
very happy to be here no you know I
think the one thing
um
you know obviously you you're just so
eloquent and a great speaker great
writer but you know
in a sense you're like a rock star
researcher rock star oncologist why is
it in a sense
[Laughter]
senses in all senses no you know I think
you you know you're the celebrity uh you
know you bring a sort of celebrity
presence to what is a fairly
dense in a sense boring subject
um and it's interesting because if you
look back five six hundred years and you
ask a Layman to name you know five six
the the people that come to mind when
you think about science you know the
best the celebrity scientist you know
you get the similar you get the same
names you get Newton you'll get uh you
know Freud you'll get Darwin you'll get
you'll get those same five six seven
names
going back 500 years but in the last 50
years there's been a lot of advance in
science yet the celebrity names are you
know
there's no that that one Rockstar
doesn't come up is that a fair statement
to say that there aren't
rock stars I think there is a fair State
that's a fair statement to make we can
actually talk about it uh quite in depth
about what that statement means but
let's uh let's hold that thought yeah no
no I on unpack that for us why why are
these celebrity I mean why have
scientists why are they not rock stars
now like they used to be why are you
such an anomaly as a scientist to be a
rock star
uh I can give you several answers to the
question and and some of them are more
complex than others so let's start with
a simple answer
um the simple answer is that
um uh these days rock stars are rock
stars
um and uh no one else can displace them
so
um we are left uh clutching our our our
test tubes
um but that said
um obviously the status of I think the
status of science has in some ways
Fallen
um in the eyes of people that maybe
because of many reasons
um but it's uh but it has uh some of it
has you know science itself has drug
itself into a whole it's uh its language
has become inaccessible and complicated
in a way that they it wasn't before
um those would be I would say some
uh
uh first level or first level
answers to your question there's a much
there's a much more provocative answer
to your question which I'll talk a
little bit about actually I'm writing a
piece about it right now
um for the New Yorkers you'll see it in
full form there was a a very provocative
article
um in a nature magazine which of course
is the preeminent magazine of science
journal of science
um
and you don't need to read the article
let me just summarize some of its uh the
the key the finding behind it because it
actually leads to many leads to quite a
deep conversation
um
the article tried to distinguish between
two kinds of science uh and two kinds of
medicine
um one kind of we've gotten right into
it it's I I I I like that but anyway the
the the authors
um are economists
um
from Minnesota the article tries to
distinguish between two kinds of ideas
in science
one which they call consolidative and
one which they call disruptive so C and
D as they call it
um
consolidative ideas
and this can be true for any discipline
but they happen to explore it in the
Sciences consolidative ideas take vast
bodies of knowledge and condense them
into something
and they give a couple of examples of
taking vast bodies of knowledge and
condense consent condensing them into
something that's a famous paper which
describes the structure of the electron
um I won't name the authors because you
wouldn't recognize them anyway
um but
um
but that's that would be an example of
consolidative science
uh destructive science disruptive
technology is quite the opposite
um it starts off a field Anew now you
can apply by by the way you can apply
this metric or this CD idea to economics
social sciences philosophy architecture
art etc etc but the nice thing about
science is that you can actually
quantify it and the way that they decide
to quantify it is actually fascinating
the way it is such a Quantified is
um by looking at scientific papers
articles in journals
and their
their hypothesis is that if science is
truly disruptive
then the first mention of that Discovery
so let's take Einstein's special or
general theory of relativity it is
preceded by nothing it arises as this as
we say sui generous Darwin's theory of
evolution it arises sui generous no one
has no one has verbalized Darwin's
theory Newton's idea of gravitation is
sui generous it arises out of itself
there's no reference to it in the prior
literature so if a scientific article
following the publication of theory of
evolution what's an increase
structure of DNA and
Franklin and
um and uh also structure of DNA
published simultaneously in nature
Roslyn Franklin Watson Creek
um they arise anew and if you look at
the index of Publications that follow it
there is no precedent in other words
they refer to Watson and Crick or
Franklin's paper but they don't refer to
any paper before it because all the
papers before it were wrong so for
instance they don't refer to Linus
fallings incorrect structure of DNA
similarly no one when they refer or they
talk about say
Einstein's theory of relative relativity
or Maxwell's equations they don't talk
about all the wrong theories that came
before Maxwell or Einstein they start
with a reference to Einstein's theory of
relativity right it seems through an
intuitive idea if you think about
um you know in the world of Contemporary
Art if you think about architecture you
can think about similar analogies you
see a building by Lucan and and if you
want to make a reference to it not in a
scientific journal but in some way or
the other you're going to talk about
some antecedents but it arises sui
generous generous
um in contrast consolidative science
arises out of the consolidation of Prior
work now what's nice about it is that
you can actually in the Sciences you can
actually measure it so you can take a
single index paper let's say cricks uh
and and Watson's uh paper and you can
ask the question whenever Watson and
crick's paper is referred to how many
times before that is another paper
describing the structure of DNA referred
to and you can assign a number n to that
everyone following me so far okay
so you can assign a number into that or
you can take another paper let's say as
I said a Consolidated paper and you can
assign another number into that
and you can thereby look through the
period of History
um and in this case they use some
Advanced computational tools some
artificial intelligence doesn't matter
what they used but they correlated 25
million such papers
and uh the interesting finding which I
find fascinating is that over time
contrary to our expectations the number
of truly disruptive papers in the
Sciences across all the Sciences
including some of the social
quantitative social sciences economics
being one of them has actually been
decreasing rather than increasing
so we hear the word disruptive all the
time everyone's disruptive there's
destructive bottle openers these days
this is disruptive luggage there's
disruptive God knows what
um everyone's distracted this is as if
we were in a classroom of uh attention
deficit disordered children but anyway
but the point is what's interesting in
is that um very consistently since the
1950s the level of of these truly
disruptive papers as Quantified by these
metrics that I just prescribed to you
has actually been decreasing and the
question is why and they Advance a
number of hypotheses the hypothesis that
I think is most interesting and most
believable is that science is
um architecturally organized in a trunk
and stem manner in other words it looks
like a tree rather than what would we
call a fireworks uh manner so if I work
as a center and lots of things point out
of it
trunking
Branch architecture has a central stem
and lots of branches come out of it
science has a drunken stem kind of
quality about it which is that truly
destructive science arises in a stem
like in a trunk-like quality and then
moves into multiple branches
and the idea is that those
trunks are quite rare
um and in fact are decreasing no but no
but but there are I mean there are
motories to be found right I mean um I
think there are more trees to be found
um but they haven't been found they're
becoming rarer to find in spite of the
fact that there's never been so much
money spent on research and science than
ever in the history there has been so
much money spent on on research and etc
etc so in some disciplines
um we're waiting for the for the trunk
there's been a lot of consolidation a
lot of consolidative science a lot of
consolidative knowledge but in some
disciplines there has been not a lot of
disruptive knowledge
um just to give you one contrast
um there's a trunk that's growing amidst
us right now and that's uh the whole
trunk of um I would say machine learning
and artificial intelligence yeah and
there will be that's a truly destructive
phenomenon and we can talk about it in
Greater detail I've written about
written about its effects on medicine
etc etc in cell biology
to be perfectly honest honest that trunk
goes back to the 1800s the late mid to
late 1800s when the trunk was
established and now we're in the sort of
the branch in the cell biology trunk was
established in the 1800s uh the mid to
late 1800s yeah and the artificial
intelligence is a new trunk that's being
established now the sense is that it's a
new trunk uh it is a trunk that is going
to be truly disruptive and the branches
we're already trying starting to see if
you want to continue this metaphor
already starting to see the branches
um but it's but the trunk has been is
being and has been established and with
artificial intelligence specifically you
know there is a lot there is a lot of I
I feel there is more anxiety than there
was with I don't know you know gravity
or other other or the trunk around
relativity well there's quite a lot of
anxiety around Revolution but that's
okay yeah
around Evolution yes yes when Darwin
published his book first of all Darwin's
book was a bestseller uh which lots of
people don't know the printer had to run
uh a print run five times
um because Darwin's book was was such an
earth Shaker but that's a separate point
but um yes you're going back to the
anxieties around around artificial
intelligence and do you do do you share
anxieties around that or how do you how
do you feel about it because yeah so
there are you know as you know there are
two kinds of
um rather uh broad areas Arenas I'm not
an expert in artificial intelligence
although I have
uh created startups that use artificial
intelligence I've I use it to a limited
capacity in my own work not in a very
deep capacity uh through collaborations
so um so I'm not an expert but um but I
but I engage with it quite a lot
um I think the there are two general uh
phenomena here one is so-called Ai and
one is called General AI so Jai or
general artificial intelligence
um there's not a lot of anxiety about
artificial intelligence per se
um it's the general AI that causes a lot
of anxiety although I personally think
that both should cause anxieties so for
instance the use of AI in in
surveillance
um the surveillance of citizens it's
obviously a cause of of anxiety
surveillance of political dissidents it
is a cause of anxiety
um the use of AI in Warfare
um particularly the combination of
Robotics in AI in Warfare is a cause of
I think
absolutely a cause of anxiety for me and
I think legitimately for for the general
public I mean there are other aspects of
AI which I think are very very not only
just benign but very useful
um for instance it's the use of AI in
deciphering uh patterns in in medicine
um who's going to get sick in predicting
genetics in understanding biology and
understanding cell biology
etc etc which cause are much less causes
of anxiety sorry I'm going to stop you
from a minute okay
these at the back we will come to visit
something there's so much thank you
thank you please keep it down to the
back there thank you thanks so much
thank you for that intervention I
appreciate it thanks go ahead
yeah can I take you to your new book now
the song of the cell and the subtitle
says medicine and the new human so if
you I mean it sounds a bit provocative
if you could just tell us what you mean
by the new human if you could just walk
us through that yeah so
um I mean the you know books are usually
titled my books at least are usually
titled quite late some people write the
title of a book first and then write the
book I usually write the book first and
then come back to the title
um so um your particular interest is the
new human
so I think that in
in many ways including the creation of
new organs organoids
um in the interface between cells and
devices
including potentially devices that go
into your brain
in the creation of transplants
transplanted cells transplanted organs
we are creating humans that we haven't
encountered before
we are creating
people who in the ins in in some old
Technologies would be called cyborgs
although they are not really cyborgs
they are cellborgs
they are interfaces between cellular
therapies and and human beings and in so
being are really sit at the Borderlands
of the limits of our current technology
so
um so I think these are are actually
unlike
um sort of our sort of conception of of
of of of new humans which maybe which I
jokingly call sort of um Keanu Reeves
and a black MooMoo
um uh you know the kind of Matrix like
um Quality
um that we imagine humans in fact there
are people walking amongst us here who
may have had a bone marrow transplant in
fact in our living chimeras so their
bodies are their own bodies but their
blood is being made from someone else's
body
um there will be very soon people
carrying artificial pancreatic
pancreases or pancreata there will be
people
um with in whom we are stimulating
neural circuitry to alleviate diseases
such as depression I mean
to be just to give you one example that
you might think is is very prosaic
um when the first child was born in a
Petri dish Louise Brown born through IVF
there was no such human being in the
world born and born in a Petri dish and
conceived in a Petri dish um so so I
think we are creating
um these new humans uh and they're much
more real
they're amongst us they're much more
real than the science fictional uh new
human and I think they raise many many
questions and many anxieties if you want
to call it many anxieties about who we
are what we do and what our future looks
like and actually we're moving back to
what I was asking earlier was
um in a sense these are such incredible
innovations that have happened and it's
you know again 15 20 years 30 years
yet the disdain for Science and the
design even for doctors uh seems to be
uh growing and maybe covert was a was a
big uh Catalyst for that but why then
why why is there this well I think to
some extent there's a strong word but I
don't know what about you would like to
use I think I think to some extent
medicine has driven itself to the ground
and not uh not fully
um being able to convey its uh Power and
its uh tremendous impact on human
history
um I mean I'll just give you the
broadest example of this
um I mean it's in the book as well I
mean in the 1850s or in the uh less than
100 years ago
um the chances when you had a child that
you would die in childbirth or in
certain areas on the order of 20 30
um childbirth was a deadly event
um uh the chances that you would die in
uh before you were 60 years old was uh
you know on the order of 70 80 percent
um lifespans were 40 50 60 years you
would be lucky if you were six years old
in the last less than a century even 50
odd years we've seen an extension of
lifespan into well into the 80s in some
countries
um and we've seen the oldest humans well
into their hundred and tens 115s 120s
and so forth so there's been a real
there's been a massive change
mostly
affected I think By changes in larger
it's not like medical intervention has
caused all of this mostly affected by
larger changes in hygiene sanitation
psych you know
social and Behavioral Health but Health
nonetheless
um and I think medicine has come to
represent not those what I would call a
profoundly beneficial changes
um but the but but things that are
divisive things that are politically
fraught and there's there have been I
think Paul there's been a lot of
politics at work
um in the sense of sort of the
anti-science movement uh the anti-vaxxer
movement being one one edge of that the
anti-science movement so I think some of
it is the fault of is the fault of
medicine itself
um in unbean being unable to convey its
value
um to humans and some of it has been the
politicization and the divisiveness and
the um the use of medicine as a a
scapegoat
um for uh political divisiveness both in
this country and in many countries
around the world
so also do you think it's kind of
paradoxical that this anti-science
movement has also come at a time when
you know medical advancement has touched
almost all lives and you know saved so
many lives so do you see that as a kind
of a well there's some Paradox about it
but as I said medicines and medicine and
science sciences and a particularly bad
job in in conveying demystifying
um and and and really pushing it making
the public understand what it is about
what it's doing what its purpose is what
it's sort of what the grand project is
of when it's a very poor job of it
um and I think that's and the result of
it as I said is partly the fault of of
medicine and the medical sciences and
partly because of the political device
it's been used as a tool is it also the
Commerce of it I mean there's a sense
that absolutely there's a sense that the
motivation for science is becoming more
and more commercial than it was would
you agree with that and and
um so um to some extent yes I mean the
motivation of science has become
commercial there's certainly an element
to that
um which is not necessarily a bad thing
I was just going to say exactly that
which is that you know
um the the motivation of Technology
digital technology has been explicitly
commercial
and in fact uh you could make the you
could make a very strong argument that
digital technology and social media are
are good you know have certainly have
had empowering roles in our society but
have had grotesquely uh divisive roles
in our society even today
um you know the main use of Facebook and
Twitter seems to be to troll other
people
um etc etc but you don't see you don't
see the same disdain for digital
technology which is number one highly
commercialized it's a sole purpose seems
to be to make Mark Zuckerberg some extra
money
um or Elon Musk for that matter
um it's
um you know it's uh it's divisiveness
and its political divisiveness seems to
be if anything
um just as deep if not much worse than
medicine but you don't see um you know
people standing outside the office of
Facebook with uh with posters or maybe
you do but you you certainly don't see
the the public backlash
the anti-science or anti-medicine
backlash that you see
um part of it also is because you know
we think of it perhaps accurately we
think of medicine as
um as something that is um is is
supposed to be benign it's supposed to
be not commercial it's supposed to have
um hold itself to higher ethical values
and ethical standards and that's
absolutely Fair it is it's a humanistic
science it's the most human of all
Sciences
um where whereas uh maybe maybe the
digital world got off easy by by
starting to portray itself as a Godzilla
and ending up as a Godzilla yeah but I
mean I you know in your book and I think
in your books I've not read all of them
but I certainly have a version of
interview there's a sense that I get
where you but big Pharma is kind of a
villain in in the book I mean if a
character be a villain I mean to what
extent do you think you know uh they've
been extremely exploitative somewhat
exploitative
but you know is Big Pharma become the
villain globally that big oil used to be
at one point
um I think big Pharma has become the
villain I personally don't think it is
the villain okay um I personally don't
think I think some big Pharma can be a
villain just like I think uh Big Oil
can be a villain is a villain in fact to
some extent I think it is a greater
villain
um I think
um you know uh big digital Tech
um can be and and is a villain I mean it
really depends
um we would not
um have the Global Outreach of
vaccination not just for covet but for
all vaccines had it not been for
companies just to claim a few you know
Pfizer modern and among you know
AstraZeneca among them you can't you you
can't produce you know a small company a
small startup cannot produce
um medicines for the world you need the
pharmacy if I was to wave a magic wand
and make the pharmaceutical industry
disappear I can guarantee it it will be
a loss for human beings of course
um and so on the other hand I think the
flip side of that is of course that the
pharmaceutical industry needs to take
itself and its responsibility is pretty
seriously be and find a middle ground
which it really hasn't just now it has
to some extent but it hadn't it was you
know highly resistive
um how do you resistant
um to change highly resistant to the
idea of social good
and finally after multiple years of
resistance has finally come to come to a
place where it's trying to recognize and
starting to recognize the idea that it
has to make some deep changes within
itself I don't think that I don't think
big farmers I mean as I said if I was to
wave a magic wand and make Pfizer
AstraZeneca and um you know whatever you
know Bristol Motor script disappear I
think the world would be poorer for it
but on the other hand I also do think
that the pharmaceutical Universe needs
to take itself very take its
responsibilities quite seriously I'll
give you one last example of this
um all of you must remember the role
that cipla so I know
Yusuf Hamid as a as a friend I have the
pleasure of knowing him as a friend
remember the role cipla played in in
during the AIDS pandemic at one point of
time in most of uh most of Africa
virtually all the AIDS medicines were
coming from cipla until the
um until you know world trade agreements
uh really led by the pharmaceutical
Lobby slapped uh you know hand slapped
and handcuffed
um cipla and you know essentially made
the uh the creation of of
antiretrovirals
monopolized the creation of materials
um since then there have been you know
since that moment I think many of these
companies have come to realize that
there are greater social goods that they
need to deliver on and have started
taking their role in in all of this much
more seriously much more effectively and
much more responsibly yeah and do you
think that just the I mean the amount of
money and effort that goes into research
is what they use to justify their profit
margins and the I mean they're extremely
profitable each most of these companies
extremely profitable most drugs that are
extremely profitable uh is it the
research that they use to justify is
that how they keep their conscience
going or what
um so I mean it's a complex question I
mean there have been multiple studies on
this I mean there is a look I've I make
drugs I make medicines I was going to
come to that because your arguments are
not sounding like you'd be a very good
businessman for your own company
uh I am not uh I don't I'm I'm not
involved in the big Pharma Universe I'm
uh you know I make drugs as as a as a I
make medicines in startups
um so
um I'm not I'm not beholden or in any
way but you are Pharma you're starting
you're starting an organization you'll
be a Pharma company in a sense
but I'm not Pfizer uh so um
the well so to take to take a step back
um I I think that there is making a
medicine is extraordinarily difficult
um it is one of the most difficult and
one of the most profound things that you
can do as saving a life is an incredible
thing to do
um
uh I mean look around yourself how many
of you can say that you've saved a life
anyone
yeah so if you um I've saved more than
one life and I'm very proud of it uh and
so if but I also I also take it very
seriously I take it very I think there's
a lot of responsibility attached to that
um it's not easy
um it is extraordinarily hard work every
single Discovery has to be that is
life-saving has to be dug out of
as I say cold hard Earth and
um so some of it absolutely is that
there is a value of death
um very famously known as the valley of
death
in which drugs fail
um and for a long time that's been used
as the central justification as to why
when drugs succeed they need to recoup
the costs of of that of that failed
research
um I have become more and more of a
skeptic of this idea
um mostly uh as you very well know if
you look at the economics that we look
at if you studied with any great depth
you'll realize that most large
pharmaceutical companies are surviving
by gobbling up smaller
highly Innovative
startups that's their modus operandi of
survival and in fact a lot of research
that's being done in big Pharma some of
it is very good A lot of it is not very
good at all but they survive by gobbling
up
um a small a small startup so I'm not
the biggest believer in in this idea
there may be some people in this
audience who are but this is that's not
that's not really my belief my belief is
that you know that they go gobble up
startups they do so relatively
indiscriminately many of those startups
themselves fail and then they recoup the
prices of that they have to recoup by
charging exorbitant amounts of the ones
that succeed so they're essentially
recapitulating the cycle of failure
that that's intrinsic to uh to the
development of new medicines just the
last Point here is that the way to get
out of this cycle
is is is not to crush innovation
but in fact is to encourage Innovation
such that
um instead of in instead of having uh
that high rate of failure you actually
in a way to have a high rate of success
and there are many ways we can talk
about how you can sort of tip the
balance as it were so that you have a
higher rate of success but you know as a
Layman one thought that I get is that
most of the medicines that you see you
know all the work going into are all
globalized solutions you know the same
drug cures fever anywhere in the world
or the same vaccine should work anywhere
in the world and I wondered have we made
the effort has science made the effort
of looking at local Solutions you know
like maybe I don't and I'm completely
you know as I said I'm challenged with
chemistry biology anything medical uh
but but but you know you know old
civilizations with Japan China Africa
India there's so many things which we
say is a local cure a local solution to
the cold to the fever to tummy bugs to
anything you know is there would it I
mean should we be focusing also on
finding ways to harness that suited to
The Climate suited to the population or
do we have to always find global
Solutions or a globalized I wish the
idea that there's a that there are
Global Solutions has itself been quite
challenged in it has been challenged
appropriately in science so for instance
um you know there's plenty of data
suggesting or plenty of work that's been
done
um uh to figure out whether there are
whether a drug that works in the United
States Works within racial populations
or I I should say geographically
distinct gold race means different
things different people I actually try
to avoid it in conversations but in in
ancestrally different populations in the
United States for instance
um you know
some anti-hypertensives anti-blood
pressure medicines don't work in African
Americans while they might work in white
Americans that's been proven tested with
many drugs and so there is an effort to
figure out whether you know this sort of
global Solutions are can be applicable
locally or not
but to be totally honest I mean there's
some diseases where the aberration of
physiology
um is so deep and is so consistent
um to take leukemia for instance or
cancers in general the aberration of
physiology is so deep and so distinct
that in fact the solution that is
invented in Seattle uh may very very
well work in you know in in India or in
in in in in some other place so it
really depends on what what you're
trying to solve
um so in contrast for instance you know
when you're looking at behavioral health
or psychosocial determinants of Health
drugs that work in the United States may
very well not work in other contexts
because the psychosocial determinants of
Health are very different in India the
behavioral health is very different in
southern Africa than it might be you
know compliance with the drug might be
very different in you know some parts of
the world accessibility might be
different in some parts of the world so
so it really depends on on on on what
you're talking about if it's cancer you
know if it's uh you know acute
lymphoblastic leukemia uh acute
inflastic leukemia in southern Africa is
I can tell you pretty similar to acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in in in in San
Francisco
um whereas
um you know if you take the opposite end
of the spectrum many studies done on
this um the you know
um
the The Psychotic symptoms of depression
um are very different in different
localities and different
um situationally different because
people experience grief and and mental
illness very differently yeah
so could you also talk about your work
in India
your companies work in India the cancer
therapy
um yeah I have actually a bunch but I
will talk a little bit about
um I should say that we I don't want to
dilute the the conversation towards uh
um uh immuneal in particular because we
we have a separate session on the 21st
which is just coming up where we focus
really uh on on
um on the work that we're doing in the
middle we do we'll do a data release but
yes I'll talk a little bit about it we
are the first company
um or we are from you know work done in
my laboratory and others
um
um has found its way
um to the creation of
T-cell therapy so T-cell therapies are
when you extract T cells from from a
from a patient T cells are immune cells
you genetically engineer them in a hyper
sterile environment I mean this
environment that we've created in
Bangalore is is totally up to FDA
standards or any standards EMA standards
European standards U.S standards any
standards you take them into a hyper
sterile facility
genetically engineer them and you to
make them into anti-cancer
Fighting
Machines themselves grow them up to a
large number and then reinfuse them back
into patients and we've we've used them
to cure patients
we are now for some patients with with
deadly diseases like relapse refractory
leukemia so their mortality without this
therapy would be a hundred percent they
would be dead
um there's there are eight-year-old boys
10 year old girls living right now as we
speak because they received infusions of
this cartoon therapy it's one of my
proudest things that I've done and and I
just noticed that one of our co-founders
is in the is in the audience say hello
um there's Kiran and I
um co-founded this effort this um was
not available
um to uh to the Indian public
um and is now in a in a phase 2B
clinical trial it was wonderful we'll
talk a lot congratulations but
congratulations I mean this is something
it is quite uh it is it is our proudest
moment
um
to do this
and and that has been progress that's
right I mean like I mean there's
recently I was just told there's a some
numbers came out last week I think that
the who was talking about a 30 drop in
deaths caused by cancer in in the U.S
um that's right so
um yes which is interesting because the
drug itself hasn't changed the
chemotherapy the right I mean the the
way no it has well some have changed
um so for instance
um you know many have changed not all
have changed but some have changed
um but many have changed and I think
that's very important to recognize that
they've changed and what the changes are
I mean breast cancer for instance uh the
changes have been extraordinary so in
breast cancer
um there's been a drop of about uh one
percent in mortality
um every year for the last 20 odd years
in the United States now one percent
sounds like a very small number but if
you take it across 20 25 odd years that
would be a 25 reduction in overall
mortality from breast cancer and that's
because new drugs are in in the in the
armamentarium there have been new ways
of treating breast cancer in some cases
in the case of leukemia for instance
acute leukemia in kids we're actually
figuring out how to decrease the amount
of chemotherapy rather than increase the
amount of chemotherapy I'll give you one
last example kind of an interesting
example in multiple myeloma actually
interesting disease because um
we've had a lot of internal
conversations multiple myeloma there's a
lot of multiple myeloma in India
we're actually making a T Cell Therapy
against multiple myeloma it's going
through the regulatory process right now
we'll be able hopefully we'll be able to
bring car T cells against multiple
myeloma very soon it'll be the first of
its kind as well
um uh multiple myeloma there's a there's
a lovely paper
um published about
six or seven years ago which makes the
argument that if you were to walk into
um a Cancer Clinic with multiple myeloma
in 10 years ago your chances of living
five years out would be on the order of
let's say 60 percent in the last 10
years your chances of living out five
years from that is now 80 or 80 odd
percent uh with acute lipoblastic
leukemia all lethal disease um in the
your chances of mortality in 1946
um was a hundred percent
um your chances of mortality now uh in
uh let's say about five years it was now
an 80 curable disease and now with car T
therapy that lasts 20 or 15 odd percent
we're curing about 80 percent of that 15
that's left over
um so we're really up in the high 80s so
of low 90s number for for a child so yes
absolutely there's been a big difference
much of it has to do with cancer
prevention as opposed to cancer
treatment so let's be clear about that
but in the case of breast cancer it's
not because of cancer prevention alone
it's a combination of prevention
treatment and cures and you know reading
the book The over I mean the one sense
that I got was one of optimism I mean
you just I mean am I right in catching
that yeah this is an optimistic book I
mean the Emperor of all maladies was
kind of I would say an optimistic
sobering book uh the gene if you were to
capture the mood had a sense of anxiety
about the future
um this has of course a sense of of
anxiety too we talked a little bit about
some of the anxieties that I have about
sort of the the the the the new humans
not only not only because we're changing
who we are and how we imagine ourselves
but we also the economic implications
the political implications of that but
this is in general a much more
optimistic book and so but uh but but
would you say we all should be feeling
more optimistic or do you think there's
just so much happening aside from this
book in this research which actually you
know global warming mental health these
kind of things I mean like do you get a
sense that we
should be cautious optimistic more
careful than we used to be earlier
I think that answer is above my pay
grade
um because uh I mean you know you're
certainly invoking things that I'm
anxious about but actually don't know
very much about aside from sort of I
imagine anyone else in this audience uh
you know global warming is not a topic
that I know very much about aside from
being anxious about it
um uh climate change similarly
um I do think that there are many many
things that we should be
um
less optimistic and quite anxious about
but these they lie outside my sort of
area of expertise no but does cell
biology get impacted by climate change
in a way where you feel it's impossible
to study I mean because you know the the
markers are moving so fast now even the
pace at which we live our lives right
you know the cell is
traveling faster and more distance than
ever before I mean does that change how
you can study the past to come to
results for the for for the present and
future so I mean is your question what's
the are you asking me if there's an
intersection that I can think of between
cell biology and climate change is that
is that fundamentally that yeah not only
climate change but all the new stuff I
mean things well so I mean the the
broadest thing I can say is that you
know I think
um
cell biology or cells are are the the
constitution of the human body is
responsible for one of the most vital
activities that we do which is the
maintenance of equilibrium
um the the jargon for that word is
homeostasis
um which means that you know if I were
to suddenly pick you up and throw you
into the Antarctic
um your body would have internal
mechanisms by which it would regulate
your temperature for instance back
towards normal and as much back towards
normal as possible so that phenomenon is
called homeostasis it's one of the
Hallmarks of life
um I think very broadly speaking
um the the
um the the the larger uh climactic
Geographic and political movements that
are occurring throughout the world are
really challenging uh both social and
individual homeostasis and by that I
mean it's very hard for people and
societies and individuals to retain for
instance mental homeostasis
psychological homeostasis and to some
extent physiological homeostasis when
they're moving through
um extraordinary circumstances that may
involve traveling you know
5 000 miles on on dirt roads in the
middle of this of the middle of the
summer so in that in that sense
um I think uh the the the larger events
of today are impinging on our capacity
as living systems to keep to maintain
social mental psychological and personal
homeostasis that would be one example of
of larger movements you know now that we
will talk
now that we were talking about optimism
and anxieties I just wanted to ask you
about the pandemic you have a chapter in
your book on the pandemic that you say
that you're right when we thought we
understood uh immune system so well then
biblically we tumbled I think that's
what you said so uh you know if you
could talk a bit about that and about
how the virus kind of interacted with
cells uh you know why was it so severe
in say some patients then
and seemingly fit
right so
um the tumbling that happened I think is
a is very important I've written I wrote
several pieces for the New Yorker uh
about this this idea of tumbling
um I think that there was a moment of
time in which I think we um as as a
scientific Community either as a medical
biomedical Community thought that we
understood vaccination virology and
Immunology
um among the deepest within the
scientific Realms if you took all the
systems these were things that we
thought we understood very well
um and then all of a sudden
um here comes a virus
that really challenges
very fundamental things that we know and
don't know about how the immune system
works how the immune system so
the for a long time we had actually
built pretty sophisticated models
um of the methodic way in which the
immune system tackles a virus or a
bacterium and we thought we had covered
covered the bases
um if you would ask me to describe 10
years ago or seven years ago um the way
the immune system tackles a virus or a
bacterium I could describe it pretty
methodically what I thought I could
describe pretty pretty methodically and
then all of a sudden
um sarskov 2 has turned all of that
upside down we've suddenly realized that
there are gaping holes in our knowledge
about how the immune system works and
how viruses can potentially contort the
immune system such that it doesn't work
the way that we thought it worked um
I'll give you one example and there are
many I'll give you one example one
example is uh is the phenomenon of long
coverage so many people have talked
about this it's well known in literature
um but it's raised the question which I
suppose all of you should be thinking
about
um maybe they're long virus syndromes
for many other viruses and maybe we just
have been ignoring them because we
haven't looked and it's because kovid
was such a global pandemic that we've
learned to understand the autoimmune
consequences of of covid in the long run
but maybe there's a long influenza
syndrome maybe there is a long
Epstein-Barr virus syndrome maybe
there's a long you know whatever other
virus that you might might call it
whatever the bacterium you might be
infected with we don't know because we
haven't been looking and so all of a
sudden our our assumptions about what uh
the human body or how the human body
deals with
viral infections in the long run in the
10-year run seven year run etc etc have
all been I think quite severely uh
challenged
you know I have a very mild version of
long cover with myself I can you may
have remain or people who've heard me
before can hear it in my voice my voice
is permanently changed since I had since
I'd covered it's technically long
covered
um but that's just my voice and you hear
it every day and therefore you can get a
sense of it I have a sense of it but you
know there may be other parts of your
body that are invisible uh invisible for
the most part to Medicine which may have
changed permanently because of of one
infection or another infection so that's
I think the the the the the the the
tumbling that has happened and and a
re-examination I wrote a piece for a
cell magazine called before virus after
virus a reckoning if anyone's interested
in sort of these ideas I think they're
very very provocative ideas but they're
all in that piece so do read read it um
because we may we maybe we may be sort
of just looking underneath the mat
um and finding all sorts of things that
we hadn't discovered before
your second question had to do with
um why did some why do some people have
very severe reactions
um to uh to covet well there we we know
quite a lot about it now we didn't know
about it before
um and they're all everything about this
is is surprising
um
surprise number one is that it turns out
that some people apparently healthy
um tends to happen more in men than in
women apparently healthy
um so so listen carefully and get this
have a pre-existing
pre-existing autoimmune disease that has
invisibly because no one knew about it
invisibly affected their capacity to
respond to viruses they live in they're
living amongst us we don't know about
them it's only when kovid strikes that
you all of a sudden that in previously
invisible incapacity to respond to the
virus becomes visible and those are
people who are actors so it's an
autoimmune disease those are people who
actually get very severely affected by
covid totally surprisingly results no
one ever had even heard about it before
um so that's one explanation
some people have a genetic changes or
mutations or variations in genes that
have to do with the immune system
totally invisible for the most part no
one knows about it they go about their
lives normally until covet hits and all
of a sudden they are become susceptible
to severe covid those are some examples
and we're discovering more and more
about how some people are why some
people have a greater susceptibility to
covid and to and and to Long covet I'll
throw you another surprising swinger
previous Epstein-Barr Virus Infection is
one of the major uh previous active
extreme biovirus infection including
previous mononucleosis which is a
consequence of epstein-bar virus
infection has a strong correlation with
long covid why no one knows but again
we're lifting up the mat and beginning
to see things that we just really hadn't
known about Immunology a subject that
I've studied now for
30 odd years and people have studied for
you know 150 odd years and all of a
sudden are finding absolutely new things
that we had no idea about before
fascinating fascinating new ideas in
Immunology the whole whole new branch of
Immunology really you know all this
coveted talking covert a lot and one of
the things that I believe was brought up
at a recent talk that you did on the
anti-vaxxers of America you know why one
of the theories put forth was that the
idea of vaccinations actually an Eastern
idea it's not a western idea uh and that
in itself creates a sort of sense of
resistance uh to vaccinating in America
I thought it was a very fascinating
thought I wanted to
um yeah you know Amita brought it up I
was in conversation with Amitabh Goshen
in in Kolkata two days ago or three days
ago Amita brought it up and and he's
absolutely right in fact the book talks
about it about how the origin of of
vaccination and Amitabh wondered aloud
um to what extent it was there's a
xenophobic response
um about vaccination
um I'm not sure I I agree with that a
hundred percent I think the at least the
anti-vaxxer movement in the United
States seems to me to me to be driven by
two kinds of strands um or three or
three kinds of strands I should say
there's an anti there's a Libertarian
strand which is a very prominent Trend
in the United States so my body is my
body it's invaluable you don't touch it
especially with weird things that um
that I don't want it to be touched by so
there's that there is now a kind of a
new strand of anti-vaxxer or
anti-vaxcerism that's arising which is a
which is has to do with exhaustion
people are just tired of being
vaccinated so we have to renew the
messaging around vaccination and we have
to actually re-examine
um you know for some people you know
what the strains are what the
pathogenicity or how pathogenic the
strains are we need I was talking to uh
burka earlier on television we need to
really we really need to find out the
data from China
because it we're really operating in a
black box are there new strains arising
what is the pathogenicity of those
trains it's a big black box because
what's happening there today which we
know a little bit about is going to
happen here tomorrow
um and so we need really to put some
strong pressure to release that data and
to and to find out in reality because
it's all sort of rumor and conjecture
etc etc so there's that strands of sort
of vaccine exhaustion
um and then there's of course the
anti-science in general stand so there's
a Libertarian strand the anti-science
trend and the um and the exhaustion uh
from vaccination they've sort of
collected together to create a kind of I
would say a demonic Trio
of of anti of anti-vaxxers some of whom
I think can be convinced otherwise so I
think the the the those who are
exhausted if truly The Strain turned out
to be quite pathogenic and there was a
lot of pathogens they could be converted
back
um I'm afraid the uh the libertarian
Strand and the anti-science trend will
only amplify I think I'll take a I think
we should do a couple more questions
before we open to the audience uh I know
a lot of a lot of people here is packed
house not surprisingly and lots of
people want to ask questions
um but just one you know one thought on
you know mental health you've spoken a
lot about mental health uh
um and and you've said that the
Mukherjee family uh has you know history
of of mental health and how you yourself
have dealt uh with with depression
um and you know I'm reading this book
and
I don't have the stomach for anything
bloody uh but but there were some
chapters that kind of got me uh you know
a little bit uh whatever it is so
descriptively written that I kind of you
know had to take a second and pause and
kind of just digest that
um
I really felt like I was at that I was
at that moment there was one particular
incident with a guy from Boston you've
said that you've never used the word
bloodbath again because you literally
had a bath and blood
um and I I just was wondering that
what you do uh it can be so emotionally
uh challenging it can be so difficult uh
you know you're telling patients that
they've got you know six months six
years whatever whatever you're telling
um
you're in the situation where you were
covered with blood
is it
did you ever think about you know you
know the fact that this takes a
particularly nasty toll on Mental Health
what you do
I mean the the the
uh mental health situation in medicine
is no hidden secret among Physicians uh
there's burnout depression grief
grieving
um etc etc most of us have over time
evolved mechanisms to
um deal with it uh that doesn't mean
that everyone deals with it successfully
um I think you know situational grief is
situational
um I think there's a there it's it's no
hidden secret that there is an enormous
degree of uh psychological and
psychiatric toll among Physicians
um uh
but you know what can I say if I had
um I I knew about it with my eyes open
and if I had
chosen not to have done it I would have
become a plumber um so
um or maybe I'd become a writer oh I am
a writer sorry
but anyway
um I think
um
I think it's it's it's very important
for me and has been very important for
me to take the stigma of of mental
health away
um and to describe it
um in I I hope empathetic but also
biological terms because then it doesn't
become you know a snap out of it uh it's
your fault uh blaming the victim kind of
situation you know if you describe
[Music]
mental health even if it's a even if it
arises situationally even if it arises
through because of Psychosocial reasons
if you ultimately describe it in
neurological terms in terms of the brain
in terms of the body
um you can't you can't slap your neurons
and and uh into behaving
um so you suddenly begin to realize that
there are perhaps a deeper biological
reasons that uh that that something is
happening and I do think that takes some
of the you know slap yourself out of it
um uh stigma that surrounds mental
health not only in this country but in
but in but everywhere around the world
and and what do you find the distinction
between you know in India and abroad I
mean do you feel like there is more
mental health than we know in India is
is there any distinction you would make
uh you know looking at this field here
in India and outside well I think
classically uh there was a there was a
lot of under diagnosis
um
um there's a lot of somatization or or
you know when uh when mental health is
under-diagnosed you tend to people again
has been classified it's converted into
physical health uh or the lack of
physical health
um uh uh The Chronic trauma chronic
stress can lead to many alterations in
in in in human physical health
um and so I think it it there was a
there was a lot of stigma a lot of under
diagnosis in fact when we were growing
up there weren't even words in our
lexicon to describe some of the most
common mental health aberrations and now
there are the words the Lexicon is
growing
um there you know we understand the
behavioral and the psychosocial elements
of it in a much deeper way I think the
conversation is much more open uh about
it but I still think think and I think
most people would agree that there's a
lot of under diagnosis and there's
fundamental you know school of thought
which says that the more you go away
from nature the more you're kind of
fighting a losing battle fundamentally
uh and and so
whether it's mental health or any sort
of stream of science do you do you agree
that we've kind of gone too far away
from nature in our daily lives and our
way of living in the lives that we sort
of aspire to live
I'm not sure what uh what exactly that
means I mean tobacco is a natural
product it's horribly nasty for your
health so
um so there are many natural things that
are uh that are quite bad for you
um tigers
snakes
um so no but like I mean what I what I
mean by that is you know I don't know
sleeping with the sleeping when the
sunset so what you know things like that
we're talking about
well I mean I think I mean you know if
you're talking about sort of existential
on oui uh that's that's affecting the
the entirety of our species uh it's not
clear that sleeping under Sunset will
solve the existential enemy that's uh
that's uh that's okay that's that's
affecting all of us
um uh so I don't think that's going to
be the answer I think I think that there
is a sense there's a profound sense of
of existential honoree um I think it's
caused by many things social dislocation
uh
uh you know the uh
um the uh
rather now good increasingly grotesque
economic disparities the sociologist has
many times remarked or had many times
remarked that relative poverty can have
as much trauma as absolute poverty yeah
I believe that to some extent I mean
there is a certain line beneath which
it changes so so I think there are many
reasons for what I call existential
honoree that's that's seems to be the
malaise that's affecting us but I'm
afraid I don't think that sleeping under
sunsets or sleeping under sunrises is
before I mean like with the sunsets
um and we should get to the audience can
I get a sense from show of hands
okay wow we got a lovely one so I just
have one policy sorry about questions
which is um if any I'm happy to have you
uh asked questions I generally like to
have questions uh be male female other
male female and other
um as we go along because men tend to
hog the mics uh constantly
um and um and I'm saying this because
actually people have studied this this
um I'm quite data driven so I would
highly appreciate it if uh if we go I I
love that let's do that all right so
let's start with female please yes
uh the immunotherapy that you spoke
about that you're developing in
Bangalore
uh is that going to substantially be
different in pricing to what is
presently available in India today which
is being administered well it there
isn't anything in India today so there's
no comparison uh the uh the therapies
that we're trying to administer will be
substantially cheaper than they are in
the United States and in in Europe now
that said there's a fundamental cost of
goods associated with making these
therapies they they are uh extremely
difficult to make they are not easy to
create the unique require a facility the
size of you know I would say this entire
basement to be in a hyper sterile
environment to create them so you can
only drive the price down to a certain
point of time before it becomes
impossible to produce so
um we are trying every single piece of
Indian Ingenuity including engineering
engineering Talent Etc et cetera to
bring it down as much as possible but
for this to be sustainable even in the
short run there's a there's a
fundamental price barrier I'm not even
talking about the the there's a
fundamental cost barrier that we have to
deal with and as I said we are using
every inch of Indian Ingenuity already
to try to bring the cost of goods down
to as Bare Bones as possible and survive
still as as a startup because it is so
prohibitively yeah I mean so I'll just
give you the sense of what the numbers
are in the United States which would be
coming which would be impossible so all
in the um a single bag of cartes uh
produced by let's say Novartis or a
company uh all in is priced at 450 000
dollars
um uh that's all in for the bag
uh add to that the treatment the
treatment and the hospitalization and
add to that the the uh the pre-treatment
so in other words these are for relapse
refractory patients so they've already
gone through their cycles of
chemotherapy etc etc so you're literally
looking at a figure on the let's say
eight hundred thousand dollar range and
as a friend of mine once said uh half of
infinity is still Infinity
um so half of uh eight hundred thousand
dollars won't cut it and so the answer
is uh whatever we get to it's not going
to be half of that it has to be much
more substantial than that but that said
there is a bottom price as it were
um that that the cost of goods itself
carries and we can't go below that price
unless we have you know some form of
innovating our way out of that price of
goods cost of goods Dr Dr sudhir raval
yeah please
I have two questions from you
one is a late 80s and early 2000 you
know there was a lot of hype a lot of
news about cloning and gene therapy
and at one point of time we thought the
gene therapy will probably will cure the
cancer
and now we don't hear anything
same thing in cloning
that probably it will end up with organ
cloning maybe genetic engineering pick
that also I don't know what is the
status probably you can highlight yeah
so um I mean so that the T Cell
therapies that uh that we and others are
developing are Gene Therapies so
um so the the there's no ifs ands or
buts about that and they are Curative
they are being used they are now
licensed as medicines
um and so
um you know generally speaking
there's a 10-year lag between uh the
hype around uh topic and the and the
reality
um and this sort of fits right in there
ten years ago we were talking about gene
therapy these days we are deploying it
we're using it in humans
um there are at least six or seven maybe
eight drugs that are uh FDA approved
that are gene therapy drugs in fact the
last multiple drugs that have been
approved are gene therapy drugs
including Gene therapies for uh blinding
eye diseases Gene therapies for other
diseases all of which were recently
approved by the FDA and are slowly
making their way to to other countries
um these include uh Curative therapies
for sickle cell anemia beta thalassemia
some rare diseases all of which have now
started responding to Gene therapies
where there were no medicines before so
that's one and the second idea that you
talked about is is cloning now cloning
in the tree additional sense of you know
making animal copies is certainly not
the has is certainly not the uh not the
way that things have gone but
um we not we the the I should say the
scientific Community has now worked
quite deeply on making
um uh animal models including pigs
which can be xenotransplanted into
humans that work is going along quite
well actually ever since the development
of new tools including crispr has been
going along quite well and probably will
be in patients
um within the next year or so so so
we're there
like in Jean Therapy what happened at
that time in 2000 we thought there's
oncogene and we will probably have a
drug for that that's right so that wheel
ended up in many many years not the
turned out to be the case but it's
turned out to be the case that you can
genetically engineer the immune system
to attack cancers it's a completely
different uh story this is another
question is just a bit different like
from not from science what do you think
that cell has does it have a soul or it
is just a chemical reaction for
Consciousness uh I think neither I think
that the cell has neither a soul nor is
it a chemical reaction for Consciousness
it's a least living unit of life
um somebody identifies other can I or
another woman I don't know like you
don't have to be yeah because they're
either the lady in the back standing
there behind please introduce yourself
and then ask the question hi Dr
Siddhartha this is a pleasure to meet
you my name is Samara Mahendra and we
have launched an integrative oncology
company in India called Cairo so we
propagate a lot of non-clinical
therapies for oncology like nutrition
Physical Therapy psychological
intervention you speak a lot about
nutrition can you can we speak a little
bit more about that especially in a
country where it still looked as
something that is a good to have but we
still need to build a lot of evidence
supporting how nutrition and these
therapies can actually help treatment
and patient outcomes
yeah I mean you know my my my own uh
intersection with nutrition is uh I
would say uh much less integrative than
perhaps uh what you're setting out to do
um we've been focused for a while on
identifying particular vulnerabilities
of cancer cells and identifying how to
use diet really as a drug
um and usually we've been doing this in
with diets in combination with drugs so
it's a very different modality we try to
identify we've now actually published
several uh papers in which we've
identified
vulnerabilities of cancer cells that
depend on particular micronutrients such
as particular amino acids particular
hormones including insulin
Etc so our intersection is very
different it is
um very reductive very non-hallistic
um and
um and um and it is now undergoing
clinical trials so we're in the middle
of clinical trials for that
um
in the arena of cancer prevention
um I think there's a lot that needs to
be still done uh in terms of nutrition
um I I'm really not an expert on that
all I can tell you is that there is a
well-established and strong link between
obesity and cancer
um India is a country in several other
countries are growing increasingly obese
um and uh and we we absolutely know that
uh
um that an integrative approach to
curbing obesity which combines both
medical and non-medical approaches is is
helpful
um and so in in the realm of cancer
prevention I think there's a you know
it's not going to be micronutrient
deprivation it's going to be a much more
holistic approach towards or a more
integrated approach towards
um towards cancer prevention so I think
that's the an arena where you know it's
going to be very likely to have a much
larger impact
um than the very reductive things that
we do
foreign
that recently one has been reading a lot
about
nutrition as a prevention and cure cure
for cancer which is plant-based food
intermittent fasting and autophagy and
things like that so we are as the
effective and if yes then what can be
done to disseminate this knowledge to
bottom of pyramid because this is a low
cost solution yeah so they're very
different uh so
intermittent fasting is very different
from plant-based foods you can you can
become quite obese uh eating plant-based
foods I can guarantee that
um but intermittent fasting is a
different story
[Music]
um
there have been actually reviewed and
there have been several
strong pre-clinical papers
about the role of intermittent fasting
and the insulin axis on
um in animal models on cancer
um at least two I would say
pretty well regarded papers on this
um
these have still been entirely in animal
models
and the record for
translating from an animal model into
humans is highly checkered
um so I would just be I would caution
everyone uh if you hold
um the healthy skepticism that we just
talked about
um that most drugs that work in animals
don't work in humans then you should be
equally skeptical that intermittent
fasting that works in animals may or may
not work in humans
um we'll have to find out there are
multiple trials in in progress about it
but as I said
um
in general people who believe in sort of
this integrative holistic approach to to
Medicine my general plea to them is that
if you're going to hold one standard you
have to hold the same standard for uh be
consistent with standards which is that
if you're going to hold the standards
that
drugs that work in animals don't tend to
work in humans you should also hold the
standard that intermediate fasting that
tends to work in animals may or may not
work in humans we just have to see what
the data shows when when the first
Clinical Trials come out there's no
reason to believe one and not believe
the other yeah
I'll take a
female next please like the red
and then we'll come to the first row
here thank you um hi um it was very
interesting to listen to you
um as someone um
um and my question to you is as a mother
you know we live in one of the most
polluted cities in the world uh where
the general aqi irrespective of whether
it's winter or summer is above 100 in
fact it's 250 something now and the
bands on construction Etc have already
been lifted
um I read somewhere you know who had
done some research saying that um
children born in this environment this
kind of pollution and children whose
lungs develop in and their organs
develop in this kind of pollution have
permanent lung damage and damage to
various organs
and it's also been proof that a proven
that you know as per research that I
read uh that you know children born here
and
pregnant mothers who give birth in
pollution like this
um also suffer in the long run as you
know the life expectancy goes down by
about a year and a half ranging between
a year and a half to you know whatever
so um is there also a connection that is
possible between
living in an environment like this and
you know diseases such as cancer later
on in life
um yeah so it's something that really
concerns uh a lot that's right so
um so it's been explored
um but it's not been explored at the
depth that we need to explore it and
that's partly because there isn't a
longitudinal
um the biggest problem is that there
isn't a long that there isn't a good
longitudinal database of cancer in many
of the most polluted areas of the world
um we need one
we need an incidence we need uh we need
mortality data incidence data etc etc
now some of this data exists for asthma
for instance among other diseases for
respiratory diseases there's a lot of
data now that suggests that there's an
increase in respiratory diseases there
is good data for
growth retardation and stunting
in the context of Sanitation pollution
there isn't very good data on on cancer
so it's an unfortunate gap or a hole in
in the in the data partly because we
don't have longitudinal cancer surveys
to tell us tell us this it is being
rectified so at the highest levels at
multi lateral organizations have now
launched
um as the demographics of the world
change and as chronic diseases as
opposed to acute infectious diseases
become more and more prominent in
countries like like India these
questions have to be taken with with
more and more seriously I mean the the
funny story was for the longest time
um you know the classification was
um of diseases across the world was uh
contagious versus non-contagious
diseases that's like saying that the
animal kingdom is cows and non-cows
which is absurd because in fact now the
so-called non-contagious diseases
um are taking over I heard the other day
um a statistic that more people in
Tanzania will die of hypertension than
they'll die of of you know the typical
contagious diseases that we associate
um with uh with lower income countries
so as the demographics of illness change
these longitudinal surveys become more
and more important and and in fact
there's been a there's a large
multilateral effort to get these
longitudinal Services covid really put a
I would say a side swipe to that for a
while
um because of the excess mortality
associated with kovic but we are coming
back now to as we come back to a little
bit more of an equilibrium we have to
re-explore the idea of what uh what what
the longitudinal service so I wouldn't
be to be honest I I wouldn't be
surprised if some cancers there was a
link
um but I it's just too early to tell
there's also more question I'll take a
few more but a quick intervention of my
own research in India that we we have
you know some of the best doctors in the
world yeah but somehow research medical
researchers we don't get a lot coming
out of India why is there a is there a
way we can solve that
well number one is incentivize it uh
make it uh make it uh make it easier to
do make it easier to practice
incentivize it at every level
have you know government support for it
have Federal support for it
um and um and make it you know make it a
real make it make it
um uh you know the the Keratin stick
ways of of doing this um you know a tiny
country like the United Kingdom uh
produces some of the the world's most
valuable
research uh not only epidemiological but
also basic science and so forth um uh
but it really does so because you know
it's been it's had a long ecosystem and
it you don't build these ecosystems in
overnight you need a a real concerted
effort to build these ecosystems in some
way ways I think ironically
you know the the the Techno hubs of of
India Bangalore being one of them which
is why we started in Bangalore Bangalore
being one of them
um has really enabled a certain kind of
ecosystem of research
um the fact that the Indian Institutes
of science is there the
um the Institute of genetics is there
etc etc but it really requires I mean
the U.S spends
um you know on the order of 50 billion
dollars on the NIH and another 50 odd
billion dollars if you combine the
Department of Defense and other uh you
know various other organizations so a
total of about 100 billion dollars and
even so
um
everyone in the United States thinks
that both fundamental and basic and
clinical research is severely
underfunded
um I don't know what the numbers are for
India I think it's the order of one or
two or three billion odd dollars uh
equivalent so
um for a country of its size
um we are
way under the the curve of even
um of even being close to
um what the United States for instance
wants or the United Kingdom a much
smaller country yes yeah yes please
introduce yourself and then I'll take
one back yeah
yeah I'm uh Anup Mishra a couple of
disclosures before I ask my question
number one I am an allopathic doctor I'm
not a prominent of indigenous system of
medicine and number two I am not on
College
uh my question is that there are some
good points in indigenous system
medicine one of them of course in
general is a yoga but the other one
which has been known quite some time was
treatment of leukemias and one of the
the elements which I met from that was
arsenic and arsenic trioxide is the
established treatment for acute
perpromyeliocetic leukemia struck and
you know surprisingly people don't give
Credence to indigenous system medicine
for that because it's known for 20 25
years at least when I was in all new
student medical Sciences several
patients of AML came went to ayurvedic
people first and then came to us so why
can't we do more research yeah and
there's huge number of possibilities
there
so what are your thoughts about it
well I mean if you're talking about I
mean AML is my sort of subject so uh uh
acute Pro myocytic leukemia for which
arsenic trioxide works is a tiny tiny
tiny fraction of all leukemias
um so to make a generalization about all
leukemias in fact arsenic dioxide has
absolutely no effect in fact it's
poisonous to the human body and all
these other leukemias and is generally
poisonous for other you know and has no
effect or can be poisonous for other
cancers if given at the wrong dose
um so it just happens to be that that
particular
relatively rare variant of leukemia
happens to have a genetic reason that
it's sensitive to our Center oxide
that's not to deny the fact that you
know there are lots and lots of
um potential uh discoveries to be made
I'll come back to the same question of
Standards which is that
um
the the
standards of proof for a medicine to
work or not work are have been
established since the 1800s and they're
quite simple
they tend to you know
um whether you call them whether you
there's a there's a progression as it
were from pre-clinical studies to
clinical studies to phase one phase two
and phase three studies
um
the
um my generously to anyone who believes
in any form of medicine whatever it
might be is that um is that the is that
that the standards be the same that we
don't compromise on the standards as
long as we do that I think we can
explore lots and lots of different kinds
of medicine and lots and lots of
different kinds of interventions but we
can't shift the standards around you
can't say oh gosh you know
um we you you'll never find an effect
because the the way you're looking at it
is is the wrong way because you know we
have our own way of looking at uh these
medical effects whenever that's happened
it's caused a slippery slope in the
conversation now that said this is not
this is not to you know I often say that
virtually all of our pharmacopoeia in
medicine
um including in in oncology is derived
from originally from Plants it's only
lately that we've been starting to make
medicines that are not plant-based on
plant derived
that said there was an Institute that
the NIH created which which whose task
it was to discover medicines
along the same standards using phase one
phase two and phase three data from the
uh from the from the natural world so
from the uh from what you might call
like I don't like to use this word but
from the non-allopathic world the total
number of drugs so they they existed as
in student they've now been absorbed
into another Institute but the total
number of drugs that came out of that
for the treatment I'm not talking about
prevention prevents a different story
for the treatment of cancer the total
number of drugs that came out of the
effort was
zero
they may have been looking in the wrong
place they may have been doing the wrong
kind of studies but they used the
standards that are used to
create you know or make any drugs so
with all those caveats
the total number of drugs that came out
of that effort for treatment of diseases
was a big zero there have been efforts
to reinvigorate such an Institute
but given that track record it's going
to be hard to do that in the United
States if someone's willing to fund such
an effort outside I think it would be
welcome
but uh but thus far the the effort in
the United States came up with nothing
take two more questions please there's a
lady in the back there I saw
yes please go ahead
get a mic to her please and if you can
introduce yourself and I think we can
keep them as short as possible and yeah
it will be very short time Poonam dabas
I'm basically a journalist and my
question is on bio Warfare you know with
so much of research and studies being
done into this field there are always
Rogue elements and there are lots of
theories which are floating and I would
like you to comment on that that the
kovid itself was the kind of a bio
Warfare we haven't got much information
either from the who or from China which
are both closed doors so would you like
to comment on that yeah you know I'm
being I mean endlessly
um to be honest as I said it's it I'm
not a covet expert I do follow the
literature I I when when I when I go
into some particular aspect of
government I really think deeply about
it I look up material deeply on it
um I
um if you ask me sort of what I know in
terms of what I can defend based on what
I know
um
uh in terms of the scientific literature
I think the idea that it was a pure Act
of Bio Warfare seems to be unlikely to
me based on on what I know from science
um I think the jury is out there still
um whether and it's a vigorous debate
going on in the United States and
elsewhere that this that it was an
accidental lab leak
um I think that is so bio Warfare is a
different story the jury is out there
about an accidental lab leak the who is
you very well know as a journalist
um sent a team an initial team to Han to
investigate whether this was a potential
lab leak that team concluded that it was
not a lab leak that there wasn't enough
evidence and the matter seemed to be
closed until the report of that team was
finally released and found to be quite
lacking
um they had not done large parts of what
seemed to be relatively obvious tracking
and tracing uh etc etc the big uh red
flag for the biological community at
least was that there happens to be one
Institute of back research
um in the entire country of advanced bad
research it happens to be in the same
city that kovitz seems to originated
from
um and so that was the origin of the lab
leak Theory
um there have been genetic sequences
that have been Advanced and if so if
someone's interested I'm not the expert
on this I would follow both sides of
this debate uh Alina Chan
uh biological researcher at the broad
Institute was among the first to really
raise the question of whether this was a
lab leak or not her work has been
um you know has been contradicted by a
work of others very respected
virologists who've said that that lab
League theories does not hold this is a
back and forth that's going going on I
should say that I don't know Alina
personally but I have been following all
her work and all the initial
Publications that emerged from that work
the sad story about all of this is that
she has been the target of really
horrible trolling
um on social media and he's been really
targeted by social and non-social media
for bringing up the even bring up the
question
um so I don't know the answer
um uh I don't claim to know the answer I
do know that this whole question is
being Revisited very actively that
probably is probably you know on the
order of one to two papers on one side
of the debate and on the other side of
the debate every month
published in highly respected journals
that make the argument that this was a
lab leak or this was not a lab leak I
think that no one knows for sure
um and I don't know whether it's it
remains politically feasible or not
um to re-explore the question I'm going
to say one last comment which is
um the only thing that one gains
um from this debate uh there are two
things that one gains from this debate
one thing is that
um if there's even a suspicion of a lab
leak it just means that
um it just means that we need to have
better systems of of uh of laboratory
protection and that's a given
you know that's a given in the sense
that that's a win-win situation it's not
like someone's going to say let's relax
the rules around you know dumping things
down the down your down the sink
um if anything it means that we have to
be more Vigilant that's one that's a
good that comes out of it and secondly
um there has been a lot of political
pressure on China to be more transparent
in its uh in whatever it does in its in
its research I think that's the second
good thing that's come out of out of
that so whether it's a library Theory or
not time will it will determine
um I can't tell because it seems to me
that there's sort of one push and one
pull in either direction every month and
it seems to be that it seems to be
ultimately no direct line of evidence uh
conclusive evidence in either direction
but but short answer is the who equipped
and you know to do this to actually I
mean obviously the political pressure
aside and get if they get the access can
they actually Implement these standards
that you think are they a qualified and
you know good enough to do it um so so
the who
um could have been good enough to do it
um I did read the original report I
thought it was lacking
um
um so
um you know unfortunately you get only
one chance
um at settling the issue and that chance
was somewhat squandered so
um that's where the matter will have to
rest at least for now until there is a
global uh pressure to reopen all the
boxes and reopen all the files much of
which may have been destroyed yeah the
question here please
I'm an endocrinologist in Delhi uh you
know as endocrinologist we've seen a
huge change in disease profile I've been
practicing almost 40 years and there's a
there's a huge change in the way
diabetes used to present you spoke about
obesity so many the disease profile has
completely changed in many ways much
more Western disease profile than what
we were taught as Indian music profiles
the same changes have taken place
somewhat in the cancer profile in India
when we were students then colon cancer
didn't happen in India prostate cancer
was not common in India we know all
those things have changed and some of
them we in our field we always say it's
your lifestyle that's doing it you're
eating the wrong stuff you're not
exercising enough and there are other
factors like maybe pollution as the lady
mentioned do you have a sense or is it
just that we are living longer
well so I think it's multifactorial I've
talked about this extensively in
multiple interviews and talk about it in
the first book as well
um so I think
um certainly extension lifespan is has
something to do with it but I think it's
not the only thing that has that has to
do with it so as you as you as you can
tell it's not just the
um it's not
um the change in in the number of
cancers it is a change in the
um as you as you might call it the Venn
diagram or the uh diagram sorry the pie
chart of the kind of cancers the age at
which the cancers are presenting and and
so forth
um in India we're seeing a for instance
I'll just give you one example a lot of
um young patients with multiple myeloma
um which is and
um
relatively uh people who've relatively
experienced in the field
um
um have raised the question whether
there is any a different variant and
maybe related to some endemic viral
infection and it's a theory that it's
plausible it's a plausible Theory
because it's a that's a cancer which has
to do with B cells which are the First
Responders to microbes and so forth so
there's a changing epidemiology in in
India
um uh lung cancer we we know the obvious
culprit there is of course changes in
smoking habits etc etc lung cancer was a
virtually unheard of disease
um you know 50 60 years ago 70 years ago
lung cancer in women was absolutely
unheard of in the 1900s and then there
was an epidemic in the United States as
women started smoking or were enticed to
smoke
um colorectal cancer is another great
example where I think there's a strong
link
um you know when
um Dennis Burkett went to
um went to Africa again some of this is
anecdotal evidence he saw no evidence so
ever of colorectal cancer
and there the suspicion is it's related
to to diet
endometrial cancer has become again the
epidemiology of endometrial cancers
changed ovarian cancer both related to
obesity so the the biggest driver
clearly is the increase in lifespan but
if you look with a with a deeper
microscope as it were a demographic
microscope there are broader changes
that are very clearly evident that have
to do with changes in in various things
okay I think we're running out of time
lots more questions here but I'm sorry
I'll have to I have to cut short and we
because we've taken a lot of time of Dr
Mukherjee I'd like to end with the rapid
fire as well okay
um yeah and I told you it was a firing
squad
better the bullet reaches you you'll
have you know you'll have come up with
some detail that'll block it so I'm sure
um
it's going to be a little bit you know
from left field but still play bear with
me you know you said in the book you
don't believe in rebirth
um but do you believe in destiny
uh you mean you mean predetermined
Destiny yes no
do you believe in do you believe that
there's life on other planets yes
um
your favorite scientist
Albert Einstein why
uh
general theory of relativity
okay now I'm going to try to get you to
play a game okay
it's called use reduce stop okay so I'm
not asking for scientific explanation
Lodge none of that I'm just imagine
you're talking to your dearest loved one
somebody who you know you just your
family whoever
and I'm going to tell you
a substance and would you tell me to use
it reduce using it or stop using it okay
okay and this is the context of cancer
because we don't know what really is
carcinogenic now what isn't so the easy
one tobacco you'd say stop stop
microwaves
uh use
plastic packaged drinking water
uh
don't know
okay
um plastic packaged food any plastic
package food I don't know
but if your loved one is eating from a
plastic package food you would not
comment so
um aside the answer is I don't know
um I can tell you what I do in my own
practice yes which is that I use but I
don't heat you don't heat okay
um Dairy use
um artificial food colors uh don't use
artificial sweeteners don't use but not
for cancer reasons I don't use it for
reasons that have to do with
Endocrinology more than anything else
5G
5G as in cell phones yes use use okay
cell phone towers cell phones yes you
use okay Wi-Fi routers use
hair dyes stop
a lot of reaction
I got the h Profile right now
from that response
um silver cling foil so the what silver
cling foil a tea actin foil you mean tin
foil as I use use okay well this is uh
this has been great so thank you so much
thank you for your time thank you for
being here this is very awesome
[Applause]
thank you Dr Mukherjee for session
enriching conversation thank you Anand
and devyani for stirring it so well uh
I'd like to invite Mr Rakesh Chopra
chairman of Rajiv Gandhi Cancer
Institute and Research Center uh to
present a little book of flowers to Dr
Mukherjee
security
[Applause]
I'd now like to invite Mr Raj kamalja
Chief editor the Indian Express to
present a Memento from the express group
do we have Raj here
it's a portrait by our illustrator
shivaji day
[Applause]
I'd like to also mention our partners
here today's Ada was presented by Rajiv
Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research
Center it was co-presented by fostima
and frr immigration and in association
with the ones I'd also like to thank our
Hospitality partner the Meridian please
join us for some cocktails thank you
anyway
[Music]
foreign